Commentary
----------

Go provides C-style `/* */` block comments and C++-style `//` line
comments. Line comments are the norm; block comments appear mostly as
package comments, but are useful within an expression or to disable
large swaths of code.

The program—and web server—`godoc` processes Go source files to extract
documentation about the contents of the package. Comments that appear
before top-level declarations, with no intervening newlines, are
extracted along with the declaration to serve as explanatory text for
the item. The nature and style of these comments determines the quality
of the documentation `godoc` produces.

Every package should have a *package comment*, a block comment preceding
the package clause. For multi-file packages, the package comment only
needs to be present in one file, and any one will do. The package
comment should introduce the package and provide information relevant to
the package as a whole. It will appear first on the `godoc` page and
should set up the detailed documentation that follows.

    /*
    Package regexp implements a simple library for regular expressions.

    The syntax of the regular expressions accepted is:

        regexp:
            concatenation { '|' concatenation }
        concatenation:
            { closure }
        closure:
            term [ '*' | '+' | '?' ]
        term:
            '^'
            '$'
            '.'
            character
            '[' [ '^' ] character-ranges ']'
            '(' regexp ')'
    */
    package regexp

If the package is simple, the package comment can be brief.

    // Package path implements utility routines for
    // manipulating slash-separated filename paths.

Comments do not need extra formatting such as banners of stars. The
generated output may not even be presented in a fixed-width font, so
don't depend on spacing for alignment—`godoc`, like `gofmt`, takes care
of that. The comments are uninterpreted plain text, so HTML and other
annotations such as `_this_` will reproduce *verbatim* and should not be
used. One adjustment `godoc` does do is to display indented text in a
fixed-width font, suitable for program snippets. The package comment for
the [`fmt` package](/pkg/fmt/) uses this to good effect.

Depending on the context, `godoc` might not even reformat comments, so
make sure they look good straight up: use correct spelling, punctuation,
and sentence structure, fold long lines, and so on.

Inside a package, any comment immediately preceding a top-level
declaration serves as a *doc comment* for that declaration. Every
exported (capitalized) name in a program should have a doc comment.

Doc comments work best as complete sentences, which allow a wide variety
of automated presentations. The first sentence should be a one-sentence
summary that starts with the name being declared.

    // Compile parses a regular expression and returns, if successful, a Regexp
    // object that can be used to match against text.
    func Compile(str string) (regexp *Regexp, err error) {

If the name always begins the comment, the output of `godoc` can
usefully be run through `grep`. Imagine you couldn't remember the name
"Compile" but were looking for the parsing function for regular
expressions, so you ran the command,

    $ godoc regexp | grep parse

If all the doc comments in the package began, "This function...", `grep`
wouldn't help you remember the name. But because the package starts each
doc comment with the name, you'd see something like this, which recalls
the word you're looking for.

    $ godoc regexp | grep parse
        Compile parses a regular expression and returns, if successful, a Regexp
        parsed. It simplifies safe initialization of global variables holding
        cannot be parsed. It simplifies safe initialization of global variables
    $

Go's declaration syntax allows grouping of declarations. A single doc
comment can introduce a group of related constants or variables. Since
the whole declaration is presented, such a comment can often be
perfunctory.

    // Error codes returned by failures to parse an expression.
    var (
        ErrInternal      = errors.New("regexp: internal error")
        ErrUnmatchedLpar = errors.New("regexp: unmatched '('")
        ErrUnmatchedRpar = errors.New("regexp: unmatched ')'")
        ...
    )

Grouping can also indicate relationships between items, such as the fact
that a set of variables is protected by a mutex.

    var (
        countLock   sync.Mutex
        inputCount  uint32
        outputCount uint32
        errorCount  uint32
    )

