Initialization
--------------

Although it doesn't look superficially very different from
initialization in C or C++, initialization in Go is more powerful.
Complex structures can be built during initialization and the ordering
issues among initialized objects, even among different packages, are
handled correctly.

### Constants

Constants in Go are just thatâ€”constant. They are created at compile
time, even when defined as locals in functions, and can only be numbers,
characters (runes), strings or booleans. Because of the compile-time
restriction, the expressions that define them must be constant
expressions, evaluatable by the compiler. For instance, `1<<3` is a
constant expression, while `math.Sin(math.Pi/4)` is not because the
function call to `math.Sin` needs to happen at run time.

In Go, enumerated constants are created using the `iota` enumerator.
Since `iota` can be part of an expression and expressions can be
implicitly repeated, it is easy to build intricate sets of values.

    type ByteSize float64

    const (
        _           = iota // ignore first value by assigning to blank identifier
        KB ByteSize = 1 << (10 * iota)
        MB
        GB
        TB
        PB
        EB
        ZB
        YB
    )

The ability to attach a method such as `String` to any user-defined type
makes it possible for arbitrary values to format themselves
automatically for printing. Although you'll see it most often applied to
structs, this technique is also useful for scalar types such as
floating-point types like `ByteSize`.

    func (b ByteSize) String() string {
        switch {
        case b >= YB:
            return fmt.Sprintf("%.2fYB", b/YB)
        case b >= ZB:
            return fmt.Sprintf("%.2fZB", b/ZB)
        case b >= EB:
            return fmt.Sprintf("%.2fEB", b/EB)
        case b >= PB:
            return fmt.Sprintf("%.2fPB", b/PB)
        case b >= TB:
            return fmt.Sprintf("%.2fTB", b/TB)
        case b >= GB:
            return fmt.Sprintf("%.2fGB", b/GB)
        case b >= MB:
            return fmt.Sprintf("%.2fMB", b/MB)
        case b >= KB:
            return fmt.Sprintf("%.2fKB", b/KB)
        }
        return fmt.Sprintf("%.2fB", b)
    }

The expression `YB` prints as `1.00YB`, while `ByteSize(1e13)` prints as
`9.09TB`.

The use here of `Sprintf` to implement `ByteSize`'s `String` method is
safe (avoids recurring indefinitely) not because of a conversion but
because it calls `Sprintf` with `%f`, which is not a string format:
`Sprintf` will only call the `String` method when it wants a string, and
`%f` wants a floating-point value.

### Variables

Variables can be initialized just like constants but the initializer can
be a general expression computed at run time.

    var (
        home   = os.Getenv("HOME")
        user   = os.Getenv("USER")
        gopath = os.Getenv("GOPATH")
    )

### The init function {#init}

Finally, each source file can define its own niladic `init` function to
set up whatever state is required. (Actually each file can have multiple
`init` functions.) And finally means finally: `init` is called after all
the variable declarations in the package have evaluated their
initializers, and those are evaluated only after all the imported
packages have been initialized.

Besides initializations that cannot be expressed as declarations, a
common use of `init` functions is to verify or repair correctness of the
program state before real execution begins.

    func init() {
        if user == "" {
            log.Fatal("$USER not set")
        }
        if home == "" {
            home = "/home/" + user
        }
        if gopath == "" {
            gopath = home + "/go"
        }
        // gopath may be overridden by --gopath flag on command line.
        flag.StringVar(&gopath, "gopath", gopath, "override default GOPATH")
    }

