Methods
-------

### Pointers vs. Values {#pointers_vs_values}

As we saw with `ByteSize`, methods can be defined for any named type
(except a pointer or an interface); the receiver does not have to be a
struct.

In the discussion of slices above, we wrote an `Append` function. We can
define it as a method on slices instead. To do this, we first declare a
named type to which we can bind the method, and then make the receiver
for the method a value of that type.

    type ByteSlice []byte

    func (slice ByteSlice) Append(data []byte) []byte {
        // Body exactly the same as above
    }

This still requires the method to return the updated slice. We can
eliminate that clumsiness by redefining the method to take a *pointer*
to a `ByteSlice` as its receiver, so the method can overwrite the
caller's slice.

    func (p *ByteSlice) Append(data []byte) {
        slice := *p
        // Body as above, without the return.
        *p = slice
    }

In fact, we can do even better. If we modify our function so it looks
like a standard `Write` method, like this,

    func (p *ByteSlice) Write(data []byte) (n int, err error) {
        slice := *p
        // Again as above.
        *p = slice
        return len(data), nil
    }

then the type `*ByteSlice` satisfies the standard interface `io.Writer`,
which is handy. For instance, we can print into one.

        var b ByteSlice
        fmt.Fprintf(&b, "This hour has %d days\n", 7)

We pass the address of a `ByteSlice` because only `*ByteSlice` satisfies
`io.Writer`. The rule about pointers vs. values for receivers is that
value methods can be invoked on pointers and values, but pointer methods
can only be invoked on pointers.

This rule arises because pointer methods can modify the receiver;
invoking them on a value would cause the method to receive a copy of the
value, so any modifications would be discarded. The language therefore
disallows this mistake. There is a handy exception, though. When the
value is addressable, the language takes care of the common case of
invoking a pointer method on a value by inserting the address operator
automatically. In our example, the variable `b` is addressable, so we
can call its `Write` method with just `b.Write`. The compiler will
rewrite that to `(&b).Write` for us.

By the way, the idea of using `Write` on a slice of bytes is central to
the implementation of `bytes.Buffer`.

